you
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
He's A&M class of 1969, head Yale leader his senior year, then U.S.
Army Transportation Specialist in Vietnam in 1971 and 1972.
Bill Youngkin is a distinguished attorney in the Brazos Valley, but today he's here not just because of his service as a Vietnam vet, but because he shares my passion for telling stories of the greatest generations.
For more than a year now, Bill Youngkin has been writing the stories of Brazos Valley World War II veterans as part of a weekly series appearing each Sunday in the Bryan College Station Eagle, Brazos Valley Heroes.
Bill and I share the honored privilege of knowing these brave men and women
and hearing their stories firsthand.
Bill Youngkin, thanks for being with me.
We do share this uncommon passion for giving credit to World War II veterans.
But first, I want you to talk about your service in Vietnam.
After you got out of Texas A&M, 71 and 72, what was your job as a transportation specialist?
Well, basically I was assigned to the I-Corps area and we were supportive of the 101st Airborne Division.
and the A of the 4th Artillery had all these fire bases up along the Laotian border and DMZ and my job was basically to keep us going with powder and projectile and whatever else was needed and they'd bring it as far north as I could and then I'd make sure I'd lug it around to various fire bases and so spent my time pretty close to the DMZ.
You did a lot of your work, I believe, at nighttime.
It's kind of hard to stay quiet at that time, wasn't it?
Well, not a lot of it at nighttime.
There were occasional ones at nighttime, but it's hard to be quiet when you're traveling down the old trail, so to speak, going from one place to the other.
They know when you're coming and they know when you're going.
And so, yeah, there wasn't any way to be quiet when you're doing that, that's for sure.
But occasionally we have a night deal, but most of the time it was during the daytime.
I know there's a lot of stories from that year in Vietnam, but one story that you told me earlier in particular was Christmas of 1971.
Talk about that.
Well, it was the first Christmas that I was going to spend away from my family.
I grew up in Gilmore, Texas, born and raised there.
And Christmas Eve had approached, and I was starting to feel a little low and blue about not being able to be home.
We got word that Bob Hope was gonna make an unexpected stop for his USO Christmas tour.
And we're gonna have it at Camp Eagle, which is the headquarters of 101st Division there.
And so we kind of got to draw straws about who got to go.
And off my fire base, I was able to, me and my platoon, my platoon and I were able to draw the lucky straw, so to speak, and were able to go.
went over and the stage was basically two trailers pulled together at the base of a hill.
And if you're an officer, you have to be at the back.
If you're an enlisted, you have to be next to the stage.
So I was a first lieutenant, so I was very back of the back.
And I couldn't see too good, so I pulled my gun truck that we used for these convoys, pulled it up, and I'm sitting on the hood.
And the show starts about that time, and I'm watching the show.
And somebody walks by, and I said, howdy, hey.
I looked down, and it was a classmate of mine that I'd gone to A&M with named Bill Wilkerson, who was in the band.
I jumped down, and we shake hands, a glad hand, and then up comes another and another and another.
And all together, there were six classmates that showed up there and two other guys who were class ahead of us.
We didn't know anybody was anywhere around.
We had not run across each other at all.
And so we not only had shared some time together, we got shared at Christmas time.
So what started out to be one of what I thought was going to be one of my worst Christmases ended up being one of my best Christmas memories.
And I think that's why service people thought so much of Mr. Hope.
And his passing is a loss to the whole country, but particularly to those who served.
He lived a wonderful long life.
Do you remember much about the show?
Oh, I do.
Vita Blue was the athlete.
Jill St.
John was the female star.
I fell in love with her then and remained in love with her since.
It was just a wonderful thing.
He brought home to you that Christmas day.
It was just special.
It really was.
It was one of the better days I've spent.
Best day I've spent in Vietnam, I'll tell you that for sure.
Indeed.
Let's wind it back, 1965.
You came from Gilmer, Texas to the big school, Texas A&M.
1965 was a significant year for Texas A&M, your freshman year.
Yes, it was.
It was the first year that women were openly made on the campus.
and it was the first year the Corps was not compulsory.
I didn't tell you that, so you didn't know about that so much, but not like I would have known much anyhow coming out of Gilmer.
But anyway, that was when I started.
And when I started, A&M was pretty much the same place it had been since the 40s.
There were about maybe 8,500 students total.
But by the time I graduated, there was almost 13,000 students, so almost a 50% increase.
So you were here when the boom started.
I was here when the boom started, and I had the great privilege of
having my president being Earl Rutter and who is one of the greatest Aggies of all time and one of the greatest leaders that this university has ever had or ever will have.
Indeed.
You and I were talking not long ago about
things that we have in common.
You and I were at the same football game in 1967, I believe, in Lubbock, Texas.
I was a student at Texas Tech.
You were a student at Texas A&M in Lubbock.
That was a very famous football game, I think.
It was.
It was one of the few trips I made to Lubbock that I truly enjoyed when Ed Hargett scored the winning touchdown with no time left on the clock.
It was a special day for us because we went on from there and won every game and thereafter went to the
Went to the Cotton Bowl and beat Alabama in the Cotton Bowl.
It was truly a great year with a great team, and one will always be remembered.
You and I were both in that stadium.
You told a story about after the game that a young Aggie freshman was trying to get away with something, and you advised him not to.
Well, we had some dates with some young ladies from Texas Tech, and we were going to go back and try to celebrate a little bit more.
We were walking to our vehicle and of course we had uniforms on and here comes this freshman who had one of these tech bells in his hand and he was just booking and there were about 40 guys in red shirts and black pants right behind him and he sees us and he starts hollering, old army fight which was the signal to come help me if you're an Aggie and he runs over to us and those guys circle us and
They told us we want our bell back.
Apparently he had, well not apparently, he had stolen one of the hand bells that the saddle tramps used during the game for them to ring and stuff.
And so I told the freshman, I said, you know, I think that guy really wants his bell.
Why don't you go give it back to him?
He said, sir, would you think it'd be a good bull if he took it back to A&M?
I said, yeah, but I think they really want that bell, so give it back to him.
And I know he probably went back and told his fish buddies what a,
What a terrible upperclassman I probably was, because I didn't have the guts to try to bring that bell back.
But I thought discretion was a little better decision that day.
1969, your senior year, you're elected head Yale leader.
That's a very small club, head Yale leaders at Texas A&M.
I know you're proud to be one of them.
Well, it is a small club.
There are, as far as Yale leaders in period total, there's probably not more than 300 in the history of the university.
There are about 205.
Four to five.
We lose three a year.
We kind of gain three a year.
So it's a pretty select little club and one I'm proud to be part of.
Talk about what that year, what you remember most about your senior season.
Oh, I remember the players on the team.
Such really wonderful folks.
Ed Hargett, Billy Hobbs, Tommy Maxwell.
It just goes on and on.
Just really good.
athletes, but really good people.
Guys have gone on and made a difference in their lives since.
And people I am very proud of to have been a classmate of and to have been part of the athletic program at A&M.
Guys you have in contact with still today?
Absolutely, still do.
As a matter of fact, this last year when Billy Hobbs, who was a classmate, All-American linebacker, passed away, went down to San Antonio with Ed Hargett, who was quarterback, to the funeral.
And all the guys showed up.
And I was just so proud to see them all, you know, that they showed up for Billy and stuff.
It was heartwarming to see how close everybody's remained.
Indeed.
Got some photographs that you brought to share with us.
I'd like to go to one of them right now.
There's one that you're proud of.
young cadet Bill Youngkin, head yell eater.
Talk about that picture.
That was a Tuesday night practice in front of Henderson Hall.
The football team is good up behind.
That's what we used to do on Tuesday and Thursday nights for away games.
We'd have yell practice, and we'd occasionally go over and have one in front of the athletic dorm.
And so I'm telling a fable, I think, at that point in time.
And I can tell by the grins on the players behind that it was apparently funny or something because they're sure laughing.
That's a great picture.
The spirit back in 1969, it really hasn't changed very much from 69 to 2005.
You know, I will tell you that I was here during a change from all male military to been around many years since and have two daughters have gone here.
It's changed, but it hasn't changed.
The essentials, the specialness, the uniqueness of this place has remained.
The kids have ensured that that's the case.
And that's really where the responsibility of all that kind of lies with the kids.
And they have really, they have continued to be good eggs.
And I am very proud of my university, but I'm really proud of what the kids have done to maintain it.
Let's go to another picture of a
young, uh, Bill Youngkin.
Now you say that, that picture was a little bit staged somewhat after you finished today.
Yeah.
When I, when I graduated, I didn't have enough money to make that photograph.
So this is, uh, this is about a week before I go to Vietnam.
And my mom asked me to go have that picture done.
And I, and I did that.
And, uh, the other one you're holding is one.
I was going to move that one right into the shot right now.
Is me as a young first Lieutenant there in Vietnam.
Um, I was,
We were kind of all sitting around my hooch one night.
It's a little place we all slept and stuff, and some of the guys that I lived with, we'd kind of gather around and visit, and somebody took that snapshot of me, and that's, most of my shots are on slides, so that's the only one I can really come up with today.
Indeed, indeed.
Great photographs, great photographs.
One of the reasons that I invited you here today is to talk about the passion that you and I share for veterans and especially veterans here in the Brazos Valley.
You told me the other day that it started back in 1992 when you took a visit to Washington, D.C.
Talk about that.
Well, you know, after I got back from Vietnam, Vietnam was such a time in our country that there were so many people that didn't appreciate what was going on and didn't appreciate what you'd done.
And so I just, like a lot of us, I just went on with my life.
I went on and got my law degree and started raising my family, started my business.
And I just did that.
I didn't think about my military career in the past.
And I had the privilege of going to Washington for a meeting one summer with a former student association.
And I went to the wall for the first time.
And if you served during the Vietnam time period or if you grew up during that time period, there are people on that wall that you know and you know personally.
And I went and you just, you really can't help but reach up and touch those names.
And when I was there, when I was leaving, I made myself a promise that from that point on, I wouldn't go and forget the guys.
And I've held true to that since.
And I've become a lot more active as far as being a veteran,
being involved with veteran activities, things of this nature.
And mainly because I'm really not going to forget those guys.
I never will.
Right.
I know you said that 11 of your classmates from your class, class of 69, were lost in Vietnam.
And I guess that's, you said that that's the second most of any class.
Is that right?
That's correct.
And we have a memorial right here just off the quadrangle between the Sanders Course Center and the quadrangle.
All the 11 names are there and we have 11 crape myrtle trees parked around the benches there.
And I go by at least on Memorial Day and Veterans Day every year and visit with the guys, if not more often than that.
And one of them, we were on R&R together and we're coming back to Vietnam.
He was a Special Forces guy.
And I was talking about how much time we had left and we'd be back to Kyle Field and we'd see each other then.
says no bill i'm not gonna i'm not gonna make it and i said oh don't tell me that and uh two weeks later i got the word that that he had been killed oh my and uh it was uh one of those tragedies but when we dedicated that memorial um his family all the families came and his brother who was younger than us uh came over and i was talking to him about steve's death and stuff and he said i want somebody you want you to meet and he brought over this
good-looking, blond-haired, blue-eyed young man, about 14 years old.
He said, I want you to meet my son, Steve, who was named after his brother.
And he was just a spitting image.
I mean, he said, his brother Mike said, he's kind of irrigating.
I said, yeah, he really is.
Incredible story.
And then, so let's fast forward, and you get involved when they first start talking about doing a Brazos Valley Veterans Memorial.
You get involved with that on the board, and
It's reality now, as people can see from the introduction to our show, of course, pictures of that beautiful memorial out in College Station.
I'm so proud of that.
I really am.
It's just turned out better than I ever thought, and it's just a beautiful place.
If you've not been there, you need to go.
If you have a family member's name on the memorial, it needs to be there.
Just all there is to it.
And I'm on the board, and...
I'm very privileged to serve on that board.
It's something I truly enjoy doing.
I enjoy what we do, and I enjoy the people I'm doing it with.
So the memorial exists, it's done, but as far as the board and the people that put it together, you come up with a suggestion to keep this thing going as far as recognizing veterans, and that's what the Eagle article is all about.
Well, yes, and of course, we're going to keep developing the park.
It's not finished at this point in time, and the thought was, well, what do we do to keep
that need before the public, and one of the deals was to possibly do a story about our veterans, to let the people know that the guy next door to you is just not this old guy next door to you.
At some point in time in his life, he did something that's kind of unique, and you need to know about it.
And that not only did that for his country, but he's done things since.
And so that was the purpose of the articles, to let folks know about their neighbor next door.
And I think it's been accomplished because I have people come to me all the time and say, you know, I never knew that about so-and-so.
And I say, yeah, I know you didn't, but aren't you glad you do now?
And they are.
And it's just been so well received.
It's been something I've been blessed to be part of, to tell you the truth.
And the Eagle, obviously, a very cooperative.
Donnish Baggett said, go with it.
And they give you a pretty goodly amount of space every Sunday.
Let me tell you, Donnish and the Eagle have just been wonderful in their community service, and particularly this organization.
That space that they give is a prime space in the sports page.
Yes.
That cost them a lot of money.
Right.
But they make that contribution to their community every week and I am ever so thankful and everybody else should be too.
And I want to thank Donis again for him without question saying you bet we'd love to do that.
You know the amazing thing is you do it in print.
I have the privilege here at KAMU to do it on television.
And approximately how many have been published so far?
Well, we've done over a year.
Right.
So I know it's 50-plus.
I've kind of lost Kemp, but I think we're in the mid to late 50s as far as the number of stories that have been published at this point in time.
Right.
I always try to have some to do ahead of time, and I try to do an interview once a month at the former student's building here and have it videoed.
And then I will take those four interviews and write stories for a month and I'll do another set of interviews.
So you've done close to 60.
You're the 24th guest that I've had on Veterans of the Valley.
So close to 90 between us veterans that we have highlighted.
in our different mediums.
And the amazing thing is of all those 90s, so we only have one common one that you've had in the newspaper that I've had on the show.
That was Frank Coachman, and that's the only one.
So that just gives you an idea of how many veterans that there are in this valley, just World War II.
And of course, I expand to Vietnam and Desert Storm and also, but how many veterans and wonderful stories that there are here in the community.
And there's still a whole lot more to tell.
Oh, there's no question, Tommy.
It's, to start with,
I had some names of people I knew, but that was a little bit of reluctance because they didn't know what this was going to turn out to be.
But since then, I think that people have recognized that there are people they know that need to have the story told.
And I keep now a list of 20 to 30 people.
And that's just the World War II guys.
We're going to move on at some point in time, obviously, because World War II guys...
not gonna be with us forever, but to Korea and Vietnam, as you're doing.
But we're trying to do it like that because of the time constraints that we have with some of our folks.
And no matter how hard you try to get around everybody, I've had a couple of interviews I had lined up with people that got sick and then passed away on me.
So there's a real sense of urgency about doing that, particularly with the World War II guys.
And so that's why we're doing them first.
I think I've had 15 World War II veterans on the show.
I've had...
nine, I believe, Vietnam veterans and one from Desert Storm.
But you're right.
There is a sense of urgency with the World War II veterans and telling their story because the numbers that we hear are that we're losing them at a thousand a day.
And so their stories need to be told.
They need to be told the right way.
And that means them telling them.
And one that's kind of get overlooked a lot of times, the Korean veterans.
They're not very far behind the World War II veterans.
And so we're gonna have to sometime here pretty quick start catching some of those.
We're gonna miss those stories.
There's a gentleman named Bob Middleton, who I'm gonna have on the show next week, who's a Korean War veteran, as a matter of fact.
One thing that you do and that I do is, and really which is the most pleasurable personally for us in what we're doing is actually sitting down and hearing these stories.
You interview them, for the most part, you interview them four at a time.
You get together over the former students and interview them four at a time.
So you're hearing a story and three other veterans are hearing the same story.
Talk about how that works.
You know, I thought that
that might work as a format because, you know, like when I go to VFW, you can sit around with the guys and kind of have these conversations, and somebody will tell a story and kind of remind somebody of something else, and they kind of open up and start talking.
So I thought maybe the best way to do that would be with more than one present.
And it's a very nice environment, the Ring Library Room, and it's kind of just close in and just the guys.
And they really do.
I mean, it's been a very good method to do the interviews because everyone is interested in the other stories, too.
And when you get through, and it's usually about a three-hour deal by the time you get through with the interviews, and you just shake your head and say, how blessed was I to be here today and to listen to and be part of these lives and those events.
It's been such a gratifying experience for me.
I can't wait to do the next set of interviews.
And I hope that I do justice to the stories.
And I tell folks, all I do is repeat what they've told me.
I don't put any spin to it or anything else.
I just try to put it in a manageable format, basically.
But it's their story.
And it's the personal story, too.
The first thing we talk about is
It's not about the war and where it was fought and when and how.
We know that.
It's about your experiences.
What happened to you, who you were with, what you saw, what you heard, what you did.
And each one of them is unique, just as all people are unique.
And it's been every story is different from the other because the people are different.
And it's just been the most gratifying thing that I've been involved with.
And it's been an honor and a privilege for me to get to know these men.
The product that you produce is that two columns in the newspaper.
The product that I produce is this 30 minutes on television under the lights.
And that unfortunately might not be the right word, but unfortunately the viewer or the reader, that's all they get to see.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if the viewer or the reader could sit down with us in that two or that three hours that we talk to our subjects.
What I do here on Veterans of the Valley,
Every person that is in that chair, I have gone to their home or to their place of business two days before and sat down with a tape recorder so I don't have to take notes.
I could just sit back and talk to them and hear their story.
And I would have talked to them for anywhere from an hour to three hours.
And somehow,
If only you had more space, if only I had more time, because what we can't tell in that column or what we can't tell in this 30 minutes is just incredible.
We try to hit the highlights, we try to hit the best of, but they're personal stories and stories that we just don't have time for to have space for.
That's really the incredible part.
That's the main drawback I see is I just can't tell everything that I've heard.
Right.
And I just try, as you say, hit some of the higher spots that are there.
But, and some of them, there have been two or three now that I just, I couldn't put it in one article.
I mean, I had to do two stories because their stories were so involved.
And so I've had to do that on at least three occasions now, but for the most part, the toughest job is to limit the story to the space that you need to try to limit to.
And thank goodness that Donis and Em,
increase the space and made the size of the print smaller and they're doing everything they can to try to accommodate me in that regard.
The Eagle deserves a lot of kudos for what they're doing.
They're doing everything they can to put that article out there.
Well, we have a lot of great media in this town.
Of course, the Bryan College Station Eagle is one and KAMU Television is another that gives us the time and the space to do that.
I know it's hard to pick out a favorite.
It's like picking out a favorite child.
But some of the stories that really just had you sitting there just in awe
Can you think of one or two?
Oh, I can.
I can think of several, to tell you the truth.
We got three minutes.
You know, some are...
They're kind of lighthearted and entertaining.
And some are just, I mean, they're straight to the heart.
And they're kind of hard to move out of your mind sometimes because they get very honest and upfront about some of those experiences and stuff.
But there are two or three that just stick out in my mind and always will.
But every time I go to those interviews,
Every one of them is compelling, but some just stick out of your mind, as you say, more than others.
But there are, I remember one gentleman who was at Pearl Harbor the day the Japanese struck.
He had just graduated from basic training the day before.
Decided to sleep in that Sunday morning, didn't go to chow, and the bomb hit the mess hall and killed most of his friends.
And he was there from the very start to the very end, the New Guinea campaign, which is just terrible, terrible terrain to fight him.
And I remember him talking about those experiences and kind of a quiet gentleman, but tears started coming down his eyes.
And he said, New Guinea, that's where I lost my fear.
And you know, there was no question that
That terrible place and that terrible time, he overcame that.
And from that point on, he was a soldier through and through.
They're life-changing experiences.
There are people that, their experiences in the war and their experiences after have just been amazing.
I think of a gentleman who was a soldier.
within the Army Air Corps and was there from day one.
All the missions shot down four times, survived the capture of the Germans.
And then his life since has just been remarkable.
And that's the other thing too, so many of these people, they didn't just serve their country and stop.
They came back and they served their community and their family and their country in such exemplary fashion since.
You know, we talked about not having enough time and enough space.
We don't have enough time for this.
We're done.
Bill Youngkin, thank you.
Thank you, Tom.
I appreciate it very much.
Between us, Bill Youngkin and I have been able to share with you the story of now nearly 90 Brazos Valley vets.
So far, we're not running out of stories.
We only wish each week that we had more space.
I only wish that I had more time.
As long as there are stories to tell, we will tell them.
We salute Bill Youngkin for his service in Vietnam and for continuing to tell the story of those veterans who served before him.
Thank you to our underwriter, First National Bank.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.